======================================
Part 2. Structural Variants Annotation
======================================

Sansa and VEP
+++++++++++++

This workflow uses Sansa and VEP (Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor) to annotate the identified structural variants (SVs) and combines the annotations into a single ``vcf`` file.
The resulting ``vcf`` file is checked for integrity.

* CWL: workflow_sansa_vep_combined_annotation_plus_vcf-integrity-check.cwl

Sansa
-----

``sansa.sh`` script executes Sansa to identify SVs that match the **hg38/GRCh38** lift-over of the gnomAD v2 structural variants database (https://cgap-annotations.readthedocs.io/en/latest/variants_sources.html#gnomad-structural-variants).
The script sorts the input ``vcf`` file and runs the following command for Sansa:

``sansa annotate -m -n -b 50 -r 0.8 -s all -d $gnomAD $vcf``

  - ``-m`` returns all SVs (including those without matches to the database)
  - ``-n`` allows for matches between different SV types (to allow SV to match DEL and DUP)
  - ``-b 50`` is the default parameter for maximum breakpoint offset (in bp) between the newly-identified SV and the SV in gnomAD SV
  - ``-r 0.8`` is nearly the default parameter (default is 0.800000012) for minimum reciprocal overlap between SVs
  - ``-s all`` provides all matches instead of automatically selecting the single best match
  - ``-d $gnomAD`` is the gnomAD SV database
  - ``$vcf`` is the input ``vcf`` file

VEP
---

``vep-annot_SV.sh`` script executes VEP to annotate the SVs with genes and transcripts.
The script produces an annotated ``vcf`` containing all variants.

A maximum SV size slightly larger than *chr1* in the **hg38/GRCh38** genome (``--max_sv_size 250000000``) is used in the VEP command to avoid filtering large SVs.
The ``--overlaps`` option is also included to record the overlap between the VEP features and the SVs (reported in bp and percentage).
The ``--canonical`` option is included to flag canonical transcripts.


Combine Sansa and VEP
---------------------

The outputs from Sansa and VEP are combined using ``combine_sansa_and_VEP_vcf.py`` script.
The ``vcf`` file generated by VEP is used as a scaffold, onto which gnomAD SV annotations from Sansa are added.

When multiple matches are identified in the gnomAD SV database, the following logic applies to select the best (and rarest) match:

  1. Select a type-matched SV (if possible), and the rarest type-matched variant from gnomAD SV (using ``AF``) if there are multiple matches
  2. If none of the options are a type-match, select the rarest variant from gnomAD SV (using ``AF``)

**Note**: CNV is a variant class in gnomAD SV, but not in the Manta output.
Since DELs and DUPs are types of CNVs, we prioritize as follows: (I) we first search for type-matches between DEL and DEL or DUP and DUP,
(II) if a type-match is not found for the variant, we then search for type-matches between DEL and CNV or DUP and CNV,
(III) all other combinations (e.g., INV and CNV, or DEL and DUP) are considered to **not** be type-matched.

These rules were set given limitations on the number of values the gnomAD SV fields can have for filtering in the CGAP Portal and to avoid loss of rare variants in the upcoming filtering steps.
The final output is a ``vcf`` file with annotations for both gene/transcript and gnomAD SV population frequencies.


Confidence Classes
++++++++++++++++++

This workflow assigns a confidence class to each of the SVs identified by the pipeline.

* CWL: manta_add_confidence.cwl

Confidence classes are calculated and assigned using the ``SV_confidence.py`` script.
A single ``vcf`` is required as input, and the file must contain the information supporting each of the calls created by Manta.
The possible confidence classes are:

  - HIGH
  - MEDIUM
  - LOW
  - NA (Not Available): assigned only to insertions, which are currently not ingested into the portal

Confidence classes are calculated based on the following parameters:

  - *length*: the length of the variant, calculated as the absolute value of the ``SVLEN`` field
  - *split-reads*: the number of alternative split reads, based on the ``SR`` field
  - *spanning-reads*: the number of alternative spanning reads, based on the ``PR`` field
  - *split-read-ratio*: the proportion of alternative split reads out of the total number of reference and alternative split reads, based on the ``SR`` field
  - *spanning-read-ratio*: the proportion of alternative spanning reads out of the total number of reference and alternative spanning reads, based on the ``PR`` field

For each variant, all the samples are classified according to the following criteria:

High Confidence Calls
---------------------

.. code-block:: python

  length > 250bp & split-reads >= 5 & split-read-ratio >= 0.3 & spanning-reads >= 5 & spanning-read-ratio >= 0.3
  or
  length =< 250bp & split-reads > 5 & split-read-ratio > 0.3

**Note**: In the case of translocations, the length parameter is not taken into consideration.
These SVs are examined based on the number of split reads and spanning reads and have the same priority as variants which are greater than 250 bp.

Medium Confidence Calls
-----------------------

.. code-block:: python

  length > 250bp & split-reads >= 3 & split-read-ratio >= 0.3 & spanning-reads >= 3 & spanning-read-ratio >= 0.3
  or
  length =< 250bp & split-reads > 3 & split-read-ratio > 0.3

Low Confidence Calls
--------------------

All the other variants.

The calculated confidence classes are added as the new FORMAT field ``CF`` to each sample. The definition is added to the header:

.. code-block:: python

  ##FORMAT=<ID=CF,Number=.,Type=String,Description="Confidence class based on length and copy ratio (HIGH, LOW)">


References
++++++++++

`ensembl-vep <https://github.com/Ensembl/ensembl-vep>`__.
`Sansa <https://github.com/dellytools/sansa>`__.
